# Benchmarking and Performance

This page describes the recommended benchmarking methodology for SenDNN Inference, and provide some guidance to help tuning the performance. In addition to providing useful suggestions, we aim at providing a strong background to understand and interpret the results.

## Running Benchmarks

Currently the recommended tool for performance benchmarking is the [vLLM bench CLI tool](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/benchmarking/cli/) automatically present in the installation. In particular, we will detail the utilization of [`vllm bench serve`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/benchmarking/cli/#online-benchmark) which evaluates end-to-end performance in a serving context, suited for evaluating production-like deployment scenarios.

??? tip
    There are other vLLM benchmarking commands worth using as well, such as [`vllm bench throughput`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/benchmarking/cli/#offline-throughput-benchmark) for measuring offline inference throughput, or [`vllm bench sweep`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/benchmarking/sweeps/) which runs `vllm bench serve` across different parameter configurations, enabling comparison of different settings. 
    
    For multimodal models benchmarking, there are multiple ways to go:

    - `vllm bench serve` with a custom multimodal (`custom_mm`) or a random multimodal (`random_mm`) dataset see [documentation](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/#-dataset-name)
    - `vllm bench mm-processor` which specifically profiles the multimodal input processor pipeline

How to use `vllm bench serve`:

1. Start the server:
```
vllm serve \
    --model {model} \
    --max-model-len {max-model-len} \
    --max-num-seqs {max-num-seqs}
```

See the [Supported Models](./supported_models.md) page for the supported models and their respective configuration.

2. Run the benchmarking script (minimal command):
```
vllm bench serve \
    --backend vllm \
    --model {model} \
    --endpoint /v1/completions \
    --dataset-name {custom/sharegpt/random...} \
    --dataset-path {path to dataset (.json)} \
    --num-prompts {num-prompts} \
    --max-concurrency {num-concurrent-users} \
    --output-len {output-len}
```

!!! note

    When using the `custom` dataset, if the prompts already contains system instructions for your model, you probably want to use [`--skip-chat-template`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/#-skip-chat-template) to avoid applying additional system instructions on top of the existing ones.

We these additional flags can help for more insights and better interpretation:

- **`--metrics-percentiles 99,100`**: Sometimes the recorded metrics can be so skewed that the p100 value differs significantly to the p99. When this happens, the mean can be affected in a way that is non-understable without the p100. Therefore, it is good to always a good idea to always collect the max value (P100).

- **`--percentile-metrics ttft,tpot,itl,e2el`**: by default, not all the metrics are displayed. Here we ensure that all the metrics will be reported. The metrics description is detailed below (TODO link).

- The results visualization plots can be useful for debugging and results interpretation

    !!! info

        To generate these visualization, you'll need to install the plotting libraries: `uv pip install vllm[bench]`

    - **Requests Statistics**: as we will explain, the number of input and output tokens of the requests greatly affect the performance. The **`--plot-dataset-stats`** flag will save a `.png` plot that shows the number of input and output tokens generated by each request. See the [vLLM Bench documentation - Dataset Statistics](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/benchmarking/cli/#dataset-statistics).
    - **Interactive Timeline** ([vLLM Bench documentation - Interactive Timeline](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/benchmarking/cli/#interactive-timeline)): the flags **`--plot-timeline`** along with **`--timeline-itl-thresholds {itl1},{itl2}`** will generate an interactive `.html` that can be rendered in any modern web browser. Note that this works best for short runs with not so many requests.

- Save all the results:
    - `--save-results`: save the results in `.json` file in addition to the printed output
    - `--save-detailed`: save the individual recorded data for each individual request (can be useful for debugging).
    - `--result-dir {path/to/results}`: target path for output results

### `--custom-output-len -1`

When running benchmarks, usually all the requests are running with the same number of `max-tokens` (the number of requested max number of output tokens for the request), which default value differs for different dataset, this value can set using [`--output-len`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/#-output-len). For the custom dataset however (`--dataset-name custom`), if the dataset contains the number of generated tokens for each request as shown in the [Custom dataset documentation](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/api/vllm/benchmarks/datasets/#vllm.benchmarks.datasets.CustomDataset), one could load the `max-tokens` sent to the server for each individual request using `--custom-output-len -1`. Paired with `--ignore-eos`, which tells the model to ignore eos token and reach `max-tokens` for the request, we have a way to make the benchmarks to be more predictable and stable, because we have the same number of output tokens generated across runs. This is not achievable otherwise (even with temperature 0.0, unless using [batch invariance](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/features/batch_invariance/#batch-invariance)), as the number of output tokens varies across runs, making the results more fluctuating.

!!! danger

    Using `--custom-output-len -1` paired with `--ignore-eos` might have important implications:

    1. The `max-token` for the request is the exact number of tokens that will be generated. Therefore, the measured performance is too optimistic and doesn't reflect the "real" one that we would have when setting a larger `max-token` for all the requests. See the corresponding [section](TODO link to ### Max-output-tokens) in performance tuning below.

    2. The number of output tokens in the dataset might be very different than what the model would naturally produce, if it could decide by itself when to step (ie. not using `--ignore-eos`). Therefore, depending on model's verbosity, the performance might be very different. With this method, we kind of evaluate the inference code only, putting aside the model.

## Metrics Description

If the run is successful, the output result should output different metrics. We will describe those below and relate them with concepts from the [scheduling design document](For a more detailed description on how chunked prefill and prefix caching is implemented in SenDNN Inference, see the scheduling and padding design [document](../contributing/scheduler.md)).

### TTFT

The time-to-first-token metric describes the time measured from sending the request from the client, until it receives the first token. Therefore, it includes the waiting time in the queue, the prefilling time, until the last chunked prefill completed. The TTFT is highly influenced by the [scheduling admission constraints](TODO link to "Admission constraints" in the scheduler file), typically if a requests's last chunked prefill gets stuck for a long time due to the volumetric or max-context-len constraint, the TTFT for this request will be very high.

!!! warning

    The scheduling constraint consider the length of the input prompt along with the max-output-tokens. Therefore, value set for max-output-tokens has a huge impact on the TTFT and the overall performance, as soon as the max-output-tokens is high, there will be jam in the waiting queue because requests will be blocked by scheduling constraints.

### ITL

The inter-token-latency describes the latency measured between two consecutive tokens. Each request produces a list of itl values, for each of it's generated tokens, minus one (the first one describing the TTFT). Typically, the itl relates to the decode time at every step, but since prefill interrupts decode (we cannot run prefill and decode concurrently), a prefill directly introduces peaks in the recorded itls. This is a reason why the prefill are chunked and interleaved with decode steps.

!!! note
    Typically chunked prefill with small chunk size will improve the ITL values: chunked prefill with a small chunk size will complete faster than a large chunked prefill. On the other hand, chunked prefill with chunk size that is too small will introduce some overhead that will hurt the overall performance.

### TPOT

The time-per-output-tokens represents the mean time to generated the next decoded token, for a given request. Put in an anotherway, it is the mean of the itls of a request. TPOT represents better the average per-request performance, while the ITL reveal individual "peaks".

### E2EL

The end-to-end-latency is the time between submitting the request to the server and the last output tokens. This metric is not returned by default (need to set `--percentile-metrics ttft,tpot,itl,e2el`).


## Performance Tuning

The configuration of the benchmarks will have a huge impact on the observed performance. Here we detail how to better set the different parameters for the most realistic and best performance.

### Max-output-tokens

The [scheduling constraints](../contributing/scheduler.md#scheduling) use the total sequence length to consider admission of a request (ie. the prompt tokens + requested output tokens). If the requested output-tokens is too high, then it will more likely need to wait for more time before being admitted. Probably the most important optimization is to keep this value as low as possible, to a fraction of the number of prompt tokens.

### Max-concurrency

The `--max-concurrency` argument represents the maximum number of active requests that the server will handle, from the client perspective. For a max-concurrency value `n`, the client starts by sending `n` requests, then only send a new request when a previous one has finished, maintaining a constant number of active requests. In short, the `--max-concurrency` represents the number of concurrent users interacting with the server.

??? tip

    Instead of `--max-concurrency` it is possible also to control the rate of the requests sent to the server using [`--request-rate`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/#-request-rate) paired with [`--burstiness`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/#-burstiness):

    - `--request-rate`: the number request per second sent to the server. This default to infinity: all the requests are sent at once in the beginning.
    - `--burstiness`: this is a burstiness factor ranging from 0.0 (sudden big bursts of many requests) to infinity (constant rate). The burstiness factor is used as parameter to a Gamma distribution of the latency before sending the next request to the server.

The [volumetric constraint](TODO add link to last-chunk constraints) will prevent too many long requests from running at the same time. Depending on the distribution of the sequences lengths of the dataset, and even if compiling for a large batch size, there might never be more than a few requests running. Therefore we recommend setting `--max-concurrency` to approximately the following value: `max-volume-limit / top-percentile sequences length`. When increasing the concurrency a lot beyond this limit, the overall throughput will increase less and less, and the TTFT will explode very quickly.

### Num Prompts

If [`--num-prompts`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/?query=custom-output-len#-num-prompts) is set with a value that is higher than the total number of requests in the dataset, then the requests will be upsampled, meaning there will be duplicated requests. Due to prefix caching, this might artificially increase the cache hit and give a performance boost that would be misleading.

### Requests Ordering

By default, the requests are sent to the server out-of-order, but they can be sent in order using the [`--disable-shuffle`](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/cli/bench/serve/?query=custom-output-len#-disable-shuffle) flag. 

This is highly workload dependent, but for some datasets, the ordering can highly affects the prefix-cache hit. For example, in multi-turn chat dataset, we expect consecutive request to share a common prefix. If the dataset contains many requests, and if those are sent shuffled, then the cache for a common prefix might get evicted before the request sharing the common prefix reaches the server, which would this time artificially decrease cache hit, and reduce performance.
